What weighs three pounds, requires 10 watts of energy, can perform 10,000 trillion calculations
a second, and has a data storage capacity that some scientists say cannot even be measured.
Is it the latest computer, electronic device?
No.
It is the human brain, and our brain is truly amazing.
Each of its 100 billion nerve cells has thousands of connections to other cells, so our brain
not only stores information.
It can also use that information to reason and make decisions.
Today our text is from Chapter 6 of Deuteronomy.
Please open your Bibles to that chapter and keep a marker there we're going to refer to
it a number of times.
Deuteronomy Chapter 6 illustrates the capacity of our brain to process and store information.
It also contains some helpful memories.
Today's text is Verse 7, which is about child training.
But that is only a part of the lessons we can learn from this chapter.
Look at verses 1 to 3, and as we read them, picture yourself standing before Moses
and listening to this exhortation.
Deuteronomy Chapter 6 verses 1 to 3.
It says, now these are the commandments, the regulations, and the judicial decisions
that Jehovah your God has given to teach you, so that you may observe them
when you cross over into the land that you are to take possession of.
In order that you may fear Jehovah your God and keep all his statutes and his commandments
that I am commanding you, you, your son, and your grandson, all the days of your life
so that you may live a long time and you must listen to Israel and carefully observe them
so that you may prosper and become very many in the land flowing with milk and honey
just as Jehovah the God of your forefathers has promised you.
Just think, the Israelites were not following along in their own copy of the Bible.
They weren't taking notes on paper or an electronic tablet.
They had to use the God-given capacity of their brains to the fall.
They had to concentrate on what was being said, take it to heart,
and then remember all those commandments, regulations, and judicial decisions.
They had to meditate on how this information affected their personal relationship with Jehovah
and then they had to act on what they heard and teach it to their children.
That was a tall order.
How could they remember all of that information?
Well, it will help if we understand just how our memories work.
First of all, our memory involves three stages,
processing, storing, and retrieving information.
Second, there are three basic kinds of memory.
We have sensory memory, short-term memory, and long-term memory.
Sensory memory is a memory that receives information through the senses.
We remember how something smells, what it looks like, how does it feel?
Short-term memory may be called our working memory.
It helps us to retain small amounts of information for a brief period of time,
like when we're dialing a phone number.
Our long-term memory is needed to store information indefinitely.
The February 2009 issue of Awake contained an article you can improve your memory,
and it listed eight principles for putting information into our long-term memory.
Let's consider how the Israelites might have applied four of these principles
as they listen to Moses' reading of the law.
I think you'll find these memory principles helpful to retain Bible instruction
and to benefit from the training that we receive here at Bethel and in the congregation.
The first principle is interest.
The Israelites could remind themselves of the reasons for wanting to remember what Moses
was telling them, and a primary reason is given right here in Deuteronomy, chapter 6, verse 5,
where it says,
You must love Jehovah your God with all your heart and all your soul and all your strength.
Yes, a keen interest in Jehovah's instruction was essential in order for the Israelites
to maintain a close relationship with Jehovah.
Another principle is attention.
One authority said most memory failures actually represent failures in attention.
So the Israelites needed to listen carefully and not let anything distract them.
Resetation is another principle that means to repeat things out loud,
and that strengthens the connections between the brain cells,
and that's exactly what today's text is encouraging us to do.
Deuteronomy 6, verse 7 says you must inculcate them in your sons and speak of them,
or recite them on various occasions.
A fourth principle is visualization.
That means to make a mental picture of what we want to remember.
So as the Israelites heard, Moses speak the words of verse 7.
No doubt they could picture in their own minds opportunities that they would have
to speak of these things to their own children.
So by all means go back to that February 2009 awake and learn how you can benefit from all eight
of the memory principles.
But now let's look at Deuteronomy 6, verses 8 and 9.
These verses describe another memory aid.
Let's read Deuteronomy 6, 8, and 9.
It says tie them as a reminder on your hand, and they must be like a headband
on your forehead.
Write them on the doorpost of your house and on your gates.
Yes, writing things down, taking notes is a good memory aid,
but we don't want to make the mistake of the Jewish religious leaders.
Sometime after their return from Babylonian exile, they began to apply these words literally.
So they wrote down scripture citations, put them into leather cases,
and then attach those cases to their arms in their forehead.
But they did this just to draw attention to themselves.
They failed to understand the clear direction of Deuteronomy 6, verse 6, where it says,
these words that I am commanding you today must be on your heart,
not on your arm, not on your forehead.
Or as Proverbs 7, 3 says, write them on the tablet of your heart.
By taking God's instructions to heart, we will have God's laws and principles to guide us
at all times. Our actions, not a leather case on the body or a plaque that we put on our doorpost,
will be visible evidence that we respect God's word and we apply it personally and as a family.
So does this mean it's wrong for us to have a scripture citation on our desk,
or perhaps on our refrigerator? No, we even display the year text in our kingdom halls.
When the printer brothers in Japan had the privilege of printing the first complete Japanese
New World translation 40 years ago in 1982, they put the citation of Ezra 7, verse 6 on the
side of the press. And they did this as a reminder that they were sharing in a sacred work that started
thousands of years earlier, making copies of God's inspired word. As the pages of the Bible
rolled off the press, the brothers were encouraged by the example of the copyist Ezra to do their best.
How so? The footnote for Ezra 7, verse 6 in the revised Bible doesn't describe Ezra just as a
copyist. It says he was a skilled copyist of God's word, so the pressman endeavored to follow Ezra's
example. So as we take in instruction from God's word and receive training for our sacred service,
let's apply the memory principles that we learn from Deuteronomy chapter 6. Let's put our 100
billion nerve cells to work, to process and store that information, and thereby strengthen our
relationship with Jehovah and do our best in his service.